---
title:  "Only you can prevent fake news"
description: "Learn how to be a superstar bullshit detector"
cover_img: /images/Smokey-Bear-web-crop.jpg
---

What does fake news look like? While it takes on a lot of forms, common themes are:

* Disregard of truth
* Divisive
* Attention grabbing

When I first saw fake news I was angry but then I was fascinated. It's hard
to understand why publishers intentionally post such bald-faced lies. A lot of fake news is easy
to identify, but we see friends and family sharing it every day. Let's dive in.



# Trust your instinct
If something doesn't seem right, it's probably not. Here are some things to look for.


## Emotion manipulation
Does the headline make you angry? Fill you with a sense of revenge? [You're being manipulated.][wp-emo]

In the old days, headlines gave you a sneak peak of the article. In the age of fake news,
headlines tell you what you're going to feel. It's hard to resist when the article
is targeted at you, which is exactly why publishers do it. They get paid when you click.


## Ridiculous facts
If it doesn't seem right, it's probably not. Dig in. Look at the links in the article. Try to find
the sources and follow up.

Most fake news doesn't link to sources. Search Google to find alternative perspectives. 

* Do any of those results have sources? If so, read the sources.
* Are results from only conservative or only liberal news outlets? That doesn't mean it's fake news,
  but it's a sign.

Major news outlets will report on all significant stories, regardless if it supports their preferred 
political slant. If no other major outlets are reporting on the story, it's probably not real or exaggerated.
If only one slant is reporting, the story is probably exaggerated at least.


## Lying numbers
Details make you seem more credible. For example, if I say, "Trump just choked on an ice cube", you
might believe me, but if I add more details, you'll definitely believe me: "Yeah, he was drinking
a Diet Coke at 8:30 PM during the Whitehouse correspondents dinner. A doctor arrived on the scene
and diagnosed him with ICD code Y93.85, asphyxiation".

It's easy to make up numbers & details. It's a lot harder to refute them. Try to have a healthy sense
of disbelief of extra details that don't add to the story.

Even real numbers can lie when they give an impression that's wrong. For example, if I say, "the average 
American has only 1 testicle" might seem like I'm saying that most American men have 1 testicle
until you realize that half of the population is men and the other half is women. Maybe "average" doesn't
say what you thought it meant.

{% raw %}
$$\frac{count(men) \cdot 2 + count(women) \cdot 0}{count(men) + count(women)} = 1.0$$
{% endraw %}

This is a deep topic. Whole books can be written about this. I had the pleasure of reading
[Calling Bullshit][bs]. It's an excellent book about how real numbers and statistics can give you
the wrong impression. 



# Don't share fake news
If you did it accidentally, delete the post. "Unlike" the message. Do it now. It's urgent.

Fake news is a virus. Seriously, you can make models like the ones they have for Covid transmission
to [predict where a story will spread next and how fast][nature]. For Covid, we wear masks to reduce 
transmission. For fake news, ignore the story. When modelling, this comparison is perfect because 
these two things are treated the same.

It's urgent. The longer your "share" or "like" is out there, the more people will see it and be tricked
because **they trust you**.


 [wp-emo]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appeal_to_emotion
 [nature]: https://www.nature.com/articles/540525a
 [bs]: https://www.amazon.com/Calling-Bullshit-Skepticism-Data-Driven-World/dp/0525509186/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=calling+bullshit&qid=1609221797&sr=8-1

